.\" bwx.1 — Bitwarden Secrets Manager eXtended CLI
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 James Hanlon
.\" Licensed under AGPL-3.0-or-later
.\"
.TH BWX 1 "2026-06-26" "bwx 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.\"
.SH NAME
bwx \- Bitwarden Secrets Manager eXtended CLI
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bwx
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ args... ]
.br
.B bwx
.BR \-h | \-\-help
.br
.B bwx
.BR \-v | \-\-version
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bwx
extends the official Bitwarden Secrets Manager CLI
.RB ( bws )
with operational lifecycle management for secrets.
Features include bulk release tagging, versioned cloning, structured
metadata in secret notes, expiry tracking, and provider-driven credential
rotation.
.PP
Commands are organized into families:
.BR secret ,
.BR project ,
.BR tag ,
.BR import ,
.BR check ,
.BR rotate ,
.BR raw ,
and
.BR completion .
The dispatch layer accepts up to three positional words to resolve a
subcommand (for example,
.BR "bwx project default id" ).
.PP
.B bwx
requires Bash 4.0 or newer.
macOS ships Bash 3.2; install an updated version via Homebrew or pkgsrc.
.PP
When
.BR jq (1)
or
.B bws
are not installed natively,
.B bwx
falls back to Docker-wrapped equivalents automatically.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print version number and exit.
.\"
.SS "Common per-command options"
Most subcommands accept the following options before positional arguments:
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-refresh
Bypass the cache and force a fresh API fetch.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-log\-level " " \fILEVEL\fR
Override the logging verbosity for this invocation.
Valid levels:
.BR error ", " warn ", " info ", " debug ", " trace ", " diag .
.\"
.SH COMMANDS
.\"
.SS "secret family"
Commands for querying and mutating individual secrets.
Every command that accepts a
.I SECRET
argument resolves it by key name or UUID.
Every command that accepts an optional
.I PROJECT
argument defaults to the value of
.BR BWX_DEFAULT_PROJECT .
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx secret list " "[--refresh] [PROJECT]"
List all secrets in a project as compact JSON.
Pipe through
.BR jq (1)
to pretty-print.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx secret show " "SECRET [PROJECT]"
Print the full JSON metadata for a single secret, including key, value,
note, id, and timestamps.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx secret get " "[--refresh] PROPERTY SECRET [PROJECT]"
Get a single property of a secret.
.I PROPERTY
is one of:
.BR value ,
.BR note ,
.BR id ,
.BR key ,
.BR name ,
.BR filename ,
.BR tags ,
.BR expires ,
.BR provider .
The
.B tags
property prints one tag per line.
See
.B STRUCTURED NOTE METADATA
for details on note-derived properties.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx secret set " "[--from-file FILE] [--force] PROPERTY SECRET VALUE [PROJECT]"
Set a property of a secret.
Settable properties:
.BR value ,
.BR note ,
.BR key ,
.BR filename .
Use
.B \-\-from\-file
to read the new value from a file (useful for multi-line content).
Use
.B \-\-force
to allow setting an empty value.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx secret ls " "[--refresh] [PROJECT]"
Print secret key names only, one per line, sorted.
A compact alternative to
.BR "bwx secret list" .
.\"
.TP
\fBbwx secret create\fR [\fB\-n\fR \fINOTE\fR] [\fB\-\-note\-from\-file\fR \fIFILE\fR] [\fB\-f\fR \fIFILE\fR] [\fB\-\-from\-file\fR \fIFILE\fR] [\fB\-\-release\-tag\fR \fITAG\fR]... \fIKEY\fR [\fIVALUE\fR] [\fIPROJECT\fR]
Create a new secret.
The value can be given as a positional argument or read from a file with
.BR \-\-from\-file .
Options:
.RS
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-note " " \fINOTE\fR
Set the
.B note:
field in the structured note.
.TP
.B \-\-note\-from\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Read the note from a file.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Set the
.B file:
field in the structured note (deployment filename).
.TP
.B \-\-from\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Read the secret value from a file.
.TP
.B \-\-release\-tag " " \fITAG\fR
Add a
.B release\-tag:
entry to the note.
Repeatable.
.RE
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx secret clone " "SECRET [VALUE] [PROJECT]"
Deep-copy a secret and increment the version suffix.
The source secret name must end in
.B _vN
(for example,
.BR api_key_v1 ).
The clone is created as
.BR _v(N+1) .
All note metadata is preserved except release tags, which are stripped.
An optional new
.I VALUE
replaces the original.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx secret delete " "SECRET [PROJECT]"
Delete a secret by name or UUID.
.\"
.SS "project family"
Commands for querying Bitwarden Secrets Manager projects.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx project list " "[--refresh]"
List all projects as compact JSON.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx project show " "[PROJECT]"
Print the full JSON metadata for a single project.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx project id " "[PROJECT]"
Resolve a project name to its UUID.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx project name " "[PROJECT]"
Resolve a project UUID to its human-readable name.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx project ls " "[--refresh]"
Print project names only, one per line, sorted.
.\"
.TP
.B bwx project default id
Print the UUID of the default project (resolved from
.BR BWX_DEFAULT_PROJECT ).
.\"
.TP
.B bwx project default name
Print the name of the default project.
.\"
.SS "tag family"
Commands for managing release tags.
Release tags are stored as
.B release\-tag:
lines in each secret's note field.
They bind secrets to specific deployment releases.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx tag list " "[--refresh] [PROJECT]"
List all distinct release tags across all secrets in a project, one per
line, sorted.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx tag secrets " "[--refresh] [TAG] [PROJECT]"
List secrets grouped by release tag.
If
.I TAG
is specified, only secrets with that tag are shown.
Output format is
.BR "TAG: secret1 secret2 ..." .
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx tag add " "SECRET TAG [PROJECT]"
Add a release tag to a single secret.
Idempotent; if the tag already exists, the note is unchanged.
.\"
.TP
.BI "bwx tag remove " "SECRET TAG [PROJECT]"
Remove a release tag from a single secret.
.\"
.TP
\fBbwx tag project\fR [\fB\-p\fR \fIPROJECT\fR] [\fB\-s\fR \fITAG\fR]... [\fB\-R\fR] \fITAG\fR [\fISECRETS\fR...]
Add a release tag to multiple secrets in bulk.
Without explicit
.I SECRETS
or
.BR \-\-select\-tag ,
tags all secrets in the project.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-project " " \fIPROJECT\fR
Project name or UUID.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-select\-tag " " \fITAG\fR
Select secrets that already have this tag.
Repeatable.
Supplements any positional
.IR SECRETS .
.RE
.\"
.TP
\fBbwx tag unproject\fR [\fB\-p\fR \fIPROJECT\fR] [\fB\-s\fR \fITAG\fR]... [\fB\-R\fR] \fITAG\fR [\fISECRETS\fR...]
Remove a release tag from multiple secrets in bulk.
Without explicit
.I SECRETS
or
.BR \-\-select\-tag ,
removes the tag from all secrets in the project that have it.
Options are the same as
.BR "bwx tag project" .
.\"
.SS "import"
.TP
.BI "bwx import " "TAG OUTPUT_DIR [PROJECT]"
Export all secrets tagged with
.I TAG
from a project into
.IR OUTPUT_DIR .
Each secret with a matching
.B release\-tag:
note entry is written as a file named by its
.B file:
property.
Values are stored in
.IB OUTPUT_DIR /.by\-uuid/ id
with symlinks from the deployment filenames.
.IP
Raw secret JSON is stored in
.IB OUTPUT_DIR /.raw/ id
using the secret UUID as the filename.
.IB OUTPUT_DIR /.raw/MANIFEST
maps each UUID back to the original secret key.
.IP
The special tag
.B all
exports every secret regardless of tagging.
.\"
.SS "check"
.TP
\fBbwx check expiry\fR [\fB\-\-exit\-on\-expiring\fR] [\fB\-\-warn\-days\fR \fIDAYS\fR]
Check for secrets with upcoming or past expiration dates.
Reads the
.B expires:
field from each secret's note.
Secrets without an
.B expires:
field are silently skipped.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-exit\-on\-expiring
Exit with status 1 if any expired or soon-expiring secrets are found.
Useful as a pre-release gate.
.TP
.BR \-\-warn\-days " " \fIDAYS\fR
Warning window in days.
Default: 14.
.RE
.\"
.SS "rotate"
.TP
\fBbwx rotate\fR [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR] \fISECRET\fR [\fIPROJECT\fR]
.TQ
\fBbwx rotate \-\-all\fR [\fIPROJECT\fR]
Rotate a time-limited secret using its provider driver.
The provider is determined by the
.B provider:
field in the secret's note.
When no provider is set, the generic
.B prompt
driver asks the operator to paste a new value.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-all
Rotate all secrets that have an
.B expires:
field.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without making changes.
.RE
.\"
.SS "raw"
.TP
.BI "bwx raw " "[bws-args...]"
Pass-through to the upstream
.BR bws (1)
binary (or Docker-wrapped equivalent).
All arguments are forwarded without modification.
.\"
.SS "completion"
.TP
.B bwx completion bash
Print bash completion definitions to stdout.
.TP
.B bwx completion zsh
Print zsh completion definitions to stdout.
.IP
Setup:
.RS
.nf
# Bash (add to ~/.bashrc)
eval "$(bwx completion bash)"

# Zsh (add to ~/.zshrc)
eval "$(bwx completion zsh)"
.fi
.RE
.\"
.SH STRUCTURED NOTE METADATA
.B bwx
stores structured metadata in the Bitwarden Secrets Manager note field
using a line-oriented
.IB key ": " value
format.
.SS Properties
.TP
.B file:
Maps the secret to a deployment filename.
Used by
.B bwx import
to write the secret value to disk.
Single-value.
.TP
.B note:
Human-readable description of the secret's purpose.
Single-value.
.TP
.B expires:
Expiration date in ISO 8601 format (e.g.,
.BR 2026-09-20 ).
Used by
.B bwx check expiry
to detect upcoming expirations.
Single-value.
.TP
.B provider:
Rotation provider driver name (e.g.,
.BR tailscale-oauth ,
.BR github-pat ).
Used by
.B bwx rotate
to determine how to generate a new credential.
Falls back to
.B prompt
if not set.
Single-value.
.TP
.B release\-tag:
Release identifier binding the secret to a specific deployment.
Multi-value; each tag is a separate line.
Managed by
.B bwx tag add
and
.BR "bwx tag remove" .
.\"
.SS "Example note"
.PP
.nf
file: mosquitto-password
note: MQTT broker authentication credential
expires: 2026-09-20
provider: prompt
release-tag: 2026.06.01.01
release-tag: 2026.06.24.01
.fi
.\"
.SH ROTATION PROVIDERS
Providers live in
.I lib/providers/<name>
and export a function
.BI bwx-provider- name ().
Each provider sets
.BR PROVIDER_VALUE ,
.BR PROVIDER_EXPIRES ,
and
.B PROVIDER_NOTE
before returning.
.\"
.TP
.B prompt
Generic operator-prompted value paste.
Default fallback when no
.B provider:
field is set.
Asks for a new value and expiry in days (default: 90).
.\"
.TP
.B tailscale-oauth
Fully automated OAuth client credential rotation via the Tailscale API.
Requires
.B tailscale-oauth-client-id
and
.B tailscale-oauth-client-secret
files in
.BR $BWX_SECRETS_DIR .
Creates a tagged pre-auth key with 90-day expiry.
.\"
.TP
.B tailscale-manual
Operator-prompted; pastes a key from the Tailscale admin console.
Supports custom expiry entry.
.\"
.TP
.B github-pat
Operator-prompted; pastes a GitHub Personal Access Token.
Validates token format
.RB ( ghp_ *
or
.BR github_pat_ *).
Default: 365-day expiry.
.\"
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BWS_ACCESS_TOKEN
(Required.)
Bitwarden Secrets Manager machine-account access token.
Validated on first API call; the result is cached for
.B BWX_VALIDATE_ACCESS_TTL_SECONDS
seconds.
.TP
.B BWX_DEFAULT_PROJECT
Default project name for all commands.
When set, the
.RI [ PROJECT ]
argument can be omitted from every subcommand.
.TP
.B BWS_SERVER_BASE_URL
Bitwarden server URL.
Default:
.BR https://vault.bitwarden.com .
Override for self-hosted instances.
.TP
.B BWX_SECRET_LIST_CACHE_TTL_SECONDS
TTL in seconds for secret-list and project-list file caches.
Default: 300 (5 minutes).
Set to 0 to disable file caching.
.TP
.B BWX_VALIDATE_ACCESS_TTL_SECONDS
TTL in seconds for caching access-token validation results.
Default: 300.
.TP
.B BWX_CACHE_DIR
Override the cache directory location.
Default:
.BR $XDG_CACHE_HOME/bwx
(or
.BR $HOME/.cache/bwx ).
.TP
.B BWX_JQ_IMAGE
Docker image for
.BR jq (1)
when not natively installed.
Default:
.BR apteno/alpine-jq .
.TP
.B BWX_BWS_IMAGE
Docker image for
.B bws
when not natively installed.
Default:
.BR bitwarden/bws:latest .
.TP
.B BWS_CONFIG_FILE
Path to a
.B bws
config file.
If unset, a temporary config is generated from
.BR BWS_SERVER_BASE_URL .
.TP
.B DEBUG
Retained for compatibility; it does not enable shell xtrace.
Secret-handling commands deliberately avoid xtrace so secret values are
never written to the trace stream.
For verbose diagnostics set
.B LOG_LEVEL
to
.BR debug " or " trace .
.TP
.B LOG_LEVEL
Logging verbosity.
Default:
.BR info .
Available levels:
.BR error ", " warn ", " info ", " debug ", " trace ", " diag .
.\"
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.
.TP
.B 1
General error.
.TP
.B 2
Command-line usage error.
.TP
.B 3
Configuration error (missing or invalid environment variables).
.TP
.B 4
Resource not found (secret, project, or provider does not exist).
.TP
.B 5
Fatal error (unrecoverable).
.\"
.SH CACHING
.B bwx
caches Bitwarden API responses in two layers to reduce API calls.
.\"
.SS "Layer 1: environment variables"
Secret lists are stored in shell variables named
.BI BWS_PROJECT_SECRET_LIST_ PROJECT
(project name uppercased, non-alphanumeric characters replaced with
underscores).
This cache lives for the duration of the shell session.
.\"
.SS "Layer 2: file cache"
JSON responses are persisted to
.B $BWX_CACHE_DIR
(default:
.BR $HOME/.cache/bwx/ ).
Files are keyed by a SHA-256 hash of the server URL, access token, and
project identifier.
Cache files are created with mode
.B 0600
inside a directory with mode
.BR 0700 .
.\"
.SS "TTL"
Both cache layers use the same TTL, controlled by
.B BWX_SECRET_LIST_CACHE_TTL_SECONDS
(default: 300 seconds).
.\"
.SS "Forced refresh"
Pass
.B \-\-refresh
(or
.BR \-R )
to any
.B list
command to bypass both cache layers.
Mutating commands automatically refresh the cache after a successful
update.
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $BWX_CACHE_DIR/
File-based cache for API responses.
.TP
.I $BWX_SECRETS_DIR/
Directory for rotation provider files (default:
.BR .secrets ).
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
List all secret names in the default project:
.PP
.nf
$ bwx secret ls
api_key_v1
db_password_v3
mqtt_broker_password_v1
.fi
.PP
Get the value of a secret:
.PP
.nf
$ bwx secret get value mqtt_broker_password_v1
s3cret
.fi
.PP
Create a secret with metadata:
.PP
.nf
$ bwx secret create mqtt_broker_password_v1 "s3cret" \e
    --file mosquitto-password \e
    --note "MQTT broker authentication" \e
    --release-tag 2026.06.24.01
.fi
.PP
Tag all secrets in a project for a release:
.PP
.nf
$ bwx tag project 2026.06.24.01
.fi
.PP
Export tagged secrets to a directory:
.PP
.nf
$ bwx import 2026.06.24.01 .secrets
.fi
.PP
Check for expiring secrets (CI gate):
.PP
.nf
$ bwx check expiry --exit-on-expiring --warn-days 30
.fi
.PP
Rotate a secret using its provider:
.PP
.nf
$ bwx rotate tailscale_sidecar_authkey_v1
.fi
.PP
Rotate all expiring secrets (dry run):
.PP
.nf
$ bwx rotate --all --dry-run
.fi
.PP
Pass-through to upstream bws:
.PP
.nf
$ bwx raw secret get aaaa-bbbb-cccc-dddd --output json
.fi
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bws (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR docker (1)
.PP
Project documentation:
.I doc/usage.md
(subcommand reference),
.I doc/extending.md
(architecture and extension guide).
.\"
.SH AUTHORS
James Hanlon
.RI < jim@hanlonsoftware.com >
.\"
.SH LICENSE
AGPL-3.0-or-later.
See
.I LICENSE
in the project repository.
